October 1971.
An American spy submarine
hasjust crossed into Soviet waters
an area completely off limits to outsiders.
Mostpeople on board the submarine
have noidea why they're here.
But some do.
They'researching for an underwater telephone cable
that connects a brand new Soviet nuclearbase
to its headquarters over 1,000 miles away.
Attached to the submarine
is a custom madedevice
designed to wrap around the cable
and record every bit of information
that passesthrough it.
For 10 years
this device secretly fedAmericans
with a gold mine of information
until one day, it vanished.
By 1970, the US andthe Soviet Union
were deep into the Cold War,
and the constant threat of nuclear attacks
meant that both sides were desperate for
any bitof information they could get their hands on.
The US learned
that a brand new nuclear submarinebase
had just been built in Petropavlovsk
in thefar east of Russia.
It seemed strategicallypositioned
for an attack on the US,
and so Americans made it their goal
to startspying on the base.
But instead of sendingin real spies
or relying on satellite imagery,
they wanted something more substantial.
Captain James Bradley
Director of UnderseaWarfare
was studying a map of the region
when it suddenly hit him.
Since the base wasin such a remote location,
the Soviets neededto have some way
of communicating with theheadquarters
back in Vladivostok.
Radio wouldhave been too easy to hack.
And so hecame to the conclusion
that they must have run
an underwater telephone cable
through the sea ofOkhotsk.
If such a cable did exist,
intercepting itcould give the Americans
all they neededto know
about the Soviet's nuclear capabilities.
It was an idea too good to turn down.
And so with the help of the CIA and the Navy,
Operation Ivy Bells was officially underway.
Butfinding a cable hundreds of feet
below a massiveexpanse of sea
seemed like an impossible task.
Luckily, Captain Bradley once again had a plan.
He remembered back to his childhood
along theMississippi River
where signs would warn fishingboats
whenever there was an underwater cable.
If the Soviet cable did exist,
he was sure that there would be similar signs
along the Russiancoast.
After a month-long journey,
the USS Halibut
finally entered the Sea of Okhotsk.
The crew beganslowly creeping up the coast
inspecting theshoreline through a periscope.
It took over a weekof constant searching,
but amazingly,
they finallycame across exactly
what Captain Bradley hadimagined.
The submarine anchored itself in place
and a team of divers
made the dangerous 400 ftdescent
to start installing the wiretap.
The device worked by induction
and so whena conversation
was sent through the cable,
the electric pulses would be picked up
andrecorded onto a tape recorder inside the device.
If the Soviets ever tried
to raise the cable formaintenance,
the device was designed to detach
and sink to the bottom of the ocean.
After a monthof recording,
the submarine returned to the device
and the tapes were sent back to the US
to bedecoded and translated by Ronald Pelton,
an NSA analyst who was fluent in Russian.
Whenthe team received the first transcripts,
they wereamazed.
The device had picked up thousands
of conversations between high ranking Soviets,
openly talking about what
kind of nuclear weaponsthey had,
their range limitations,
and how readythey were to be put into use.
Thanks tothe wiretap
the Americans also knew exactly when
and where Soviet submarines were heading out tosea
allowing them to quietly follow them at closerange.
Every month
the USS Halibut would returnto the cable
to retrieve the tapes and replacethe battery.
Several years went by,
and the devicejust kept feeding the US
with crucial information
but it was all about to come toa mysterious end.
To find information about what happened next,
I had to do someserious digging.
Russian sites said one thing
and American sites said something else.
That's why I use Ground News, today's sponsor.
Ground News pulls together
worldwide reportson the same story
and combines theminto one place
while also showing you usefulcontext
like political bias, ownership,
and the credibility of each source.
Check out thisstory about
solar power hitting an all-time highin the US.
Here, we see how the headlines differ
depending on which side of the
political spectrumis reporting on it.
Over here we can see howtrustworthy each source is
and over here,
we can see the ownership of each source,
whichin this case
is mostly large media conglomerates.
Ground News also gives you personalized data,
helping you keep track of your own blind spots
so you can get closer to the truth.
The NobelPrize Center has even recognized it
asa great tool to stay informed
and avoid echochambers.
Subscribe to get 40% off
the unlimited access Vantage plan
by scanning thisQR code
or by going to ground.news/primal.
The link is in the description.
Again, it'sground.news news/primal
to see the full picture.
After an entire decade of secretly spyingon the Soviets,
the US wiretap at the bottom ofthe ocean
was about to go silent.
In 1981
anAmerican surveillance satellite
showed a group ofSoviet ships
hovering around the exact
spot wherethe device was located.
The US immediatelysent a submarine out
to try and recover thedevice,
but it was too late.
The device was gone.
Only a handful of intelligence officers
evenknew the wiretap existed.
So how, after 10years
did the Soviets suddenly pinpoint its exactlocation?
As it turned out,
the Americans had aspy in their midst.
It all started a year earlier
when a strange phone call was made
to theSoviet embassy in Washington.
The caller claimedto have
crucial information for the Soviets
and wanted to arrange a meeting in exchangefor cash.
At the embassy,
the man met with KGBofficer Vitaly Yurchenko
and startedtelling him all about Operation Ivy Bells,
where the wiretap was located, how it worked,
andwhat the Americans
had learned through the cable.
As it turned out,
the mysterious manwas
none other than Ronald Pelton,
the American analyst
who translated thewiretaps messages.
His life had fallen apart.
He no longer had his job at the NSA.
his wifehad left him
and he was now bankrupt with over$60,000 of debt.
And so in a desperate attemptto make money,
he decided to sell his secrets.
Pelton had just given away
one ofAmerica's most top secret missions,
and it was essentially all for nothing
since the Soviets only paid him $35,000.
He was still massively in debt,
and it was onlya matter of time before he got caught.
Ironically,
the FBI had already wiretapped
the Soviet embassy's phone lines
and becameinstantly
suspicious when they heard the call.
ButPelton never gave away his name,
and so they hadno idea it was him.
Over the next few years,
Pelton continued to meet with KGB officers
inWashington and Vienna,
supplying them witheverything he knew
about America's attempts to spyon the Soviets.
But it was all about to come toan end in one final twist.
KGB officer Yurchenko,
who had taken Pelton's initial call,
wason an assignment in Rome.
While touring around the Vatican,
he mysteriously slipped away from hiscolleagues
and headed straight for the US embassy.
When he was there,
he announced that he wanted tochange sides
and start working for the Americans.
He was doing the exact same thing thatPelton did.
Almost immediately,
he was flown tothe States
and put into a safe house in Virginia
where the CIA began questioning him.
It wasn't clear exactly why Yurchenko
had suddenlyswitched sides.
But right away, he started togive
the Americans some interesting information.
Although he didn't have a name
he told them thatthe man
who revealed the wiretappingsecrets
was an NSA analyst with red hair.
It wasn't much to go on,
but the FBI compiled alist of red-haired analysts
and listened back to the recordings of the phone call,
and sureenough,
it matched with Ronald Pelton'sprofile.
They tracked him down and arrested him,
andalmost immediately,
he admitted to spying for the Soviets.
Pelton was given three lifesentences
and ended up serving 30 years in prison until 2015,
the longest eversentence
served for espionage at the time.